if you really want to get inside a boat
and it was locked you could just use a
crowbar to open this up something to
think about if you do hear someone who's
wearing your boat
do not switch on the light here's the
base station I'm going to pick up one of
these infrared sensors
[Music]
okay ash can you shoot me with a fire
extinguisher now I'm Ben
that's Ashley together we did the
unimaginable we sold everything and then
set off on a mission to sail around the
world civilization see you later
[Music]
twenty-eight countries later and over
25,000 nautical miles we are only
halfway around the world I've no idea
what's gonna happen
subscribe to follow the adventure as we
finish this lab all right so we're here
in the Philippines and we wanted to have
a bit more of a serious conversation
with you which is security of sea and
specifically security at Anchorage we're
not gonna go into details of piracy
while we're moving we're going to talk
about how we secure our boat when we're
at anchor we're going to cover
everything that we have on our boat to
defend ourselves as well as security
measures in alert systems that we've put
into place over the last year we've
we've been watching this boat of again
I'll show you on the zoom ECAM it's a
bank it's a big fishing bank it but he's
been kind of like following us but not
really following us he kind of don't
know because you know he's probably
going out fishing in the same direction
but these boats here in the Philippines
look kind of crazy they look like what
you would think a modern-day pirate
might use but usually they're just
really friendly fishermen yeah we turned
off the engines to film and he's going
he's just coming by so he's so it's good
it's all good I think the main point I
want to make is that 99.9 percent of the
time
everybody is wonderful and we believe
firmly and we've had all the experiences
in the world to prove that 99.9 percent
of the time every human being you meet
is a wonderful human being however you
don't want to leave yourself completely
open to that 1% chance or that point
zero one percent chance or whatever it
might be if you take small precautions
it might stop a robbery it might stop
someone taking your dinghy which is so
important when you're out here it might
stop a more violent boarding if that be
the case
we've cruised some of the more remote
areas in the last year including Papua
New Guinea and
the Philippines and as we've done so
we've kind of ramped up our security
measures on this boat a little bit yeah
I'd say yeah they they still could
probably use some improvement
the funny thing is here in the
Philippines there's only been one spot
where we haven't felt particularly
fantastically safe sometimes you pull
into a place when you get a weird vibe
and you got to trust your gut so this is
like the first Anchorage in the
Philippines where we've kind of been a
little bit sketched out at sunset there
is a little fisherman I decided to come
by and do really close pass by our boat
and he wasn't just going one direction
he went the circling that went back just
checking I said you know seen what we
got on the rail seen if we have an alarm
system maybe it brings up a good point
though which is what do you do when a
fisherman comes up close to your boat in
the middle of night or an evening you're
not gonna pull a gun on them but you
could light them up with the handy spot
light which is what I did and he took
off piracy is a term that I think to me
always meant like Somalia pirates coming
onboard but it isn't totally just that
so piracy is any crime committed at sea
so that could mean petty theft someone
stealing your shorts off your boat it
can mean someone boarding your boat
similar to a home invasion style it
could be a break and enter while you're
not on the boat it could include
physical harm it include hostage taking
and ransom demands and finally death all
three of the Philippines Papua New
Guinea and the area's we've been
recently although we felt like there are
risks here
I think the incidence of things actually
happening is way higher in the Caribbean
for example in Grenada when we were
anchored there there were several piracy
attacks at boat anchor that is actually
the north coast of Mindanao that can be
not the safest place and we're actually
just gonna pull into an anchors just
ahead of us about an hour away it's
about five o'clock now and we're gonna
go over all the security measures we put
into place as the night falls and has
ran anchor
uh-oh what
do you want to start is that that poor
battery that I said we should buy a new
one and you didn't we need to change it
and you didn't all right we're pulling
into this gorgeous bay here I think we
picked a spot now and we're gonna drop
the hook and have a pleasant evening I
hope I'm putting some balls on the
anchor chain we can't see the bottom
there's either rock or coral and it
helps to not get the anchor chain to
caught so you can get it back up
[Music]
vitals on it is absolutely beautiful
here to this place that there's no one
around no one this is like the chrome of
the Philippines except there's no one
around okay so it's time to put out the
arms and we've come up with a pretty
basic solution now there's more fancy
ones and there's more expensive one you
can get built-in alarms as well but
essentially what this is is a series of
infrared sensors is a driver alert
system it's a wireless system where the
infrared sensors are powered by
batteries as well as the base station so
you don't need to wire anything in let
me show you so here's the base station
I'm gonna pick up one of these infrared
sensors that's number two zone number
one I will leave this out in the cockpit
so that all my neighbors can hear it if
we're off the boat I'll put it onto my
pillow at night so I wake up if anyone's
coming close to it so there's a few
caveats to infrared sensors one is when
the Sun comes up in the morning these
will be triggered
you should probably getting out of bed
if it's not late in the day and two if
you're in a really Rolly Anchorage this
is happening I think twice to us these
will also be triggered you can move
these sensors anywhere around the boat
where it makes sense I have two up front
and three out back so I've zone 1 zone
ones are out back and the beauty about
these things is that I always take them
off during the day or one where I was
sailing because everything on a boat
rots and crows so they come with these
little mints which I've just as app
strapped onto various parts of the boat
it's just a plastic little piece so then
you just slide that on
and then that's it and in the morning
you take it back off you go for a sail
no worries about corroding bits and then
ya get together
the most common piracy we've been seeing
in these parts of the world is petty
theft generally what happens is locals
do not want to engage in a confrontation
usually they just want to get something
and you have this abundance of wealth on
the boat compared to what they have
which is very little typically they come
on board when you're off exploring and
doing things on shore it it does happen
out here and they're definitely our
hotspots I was just about to open this
window to show you how it closes but
it's already locked but most boats have
these latches they're called bloomer
latches they feel safe but they're not
really because if you think about it
this is just plastic these are just
plastic handles they lock with this
little thing here if you really want to
get inside a boat and it was locked you
could just use a crowbar to open this up
or smash it from the top
so it's more of a deterrent than
anything else people put bars on the
inside and that's very good because then
you can leave it open at night I read a
story recently on women who sail which
is a group if you're a woman sailing and
I was reading a story on there about a
woman who and her husband who had been
boarded off the coast of Honduras I
think and they had metal grates on all
their windows and and what they were in
a monohull and they were able to also do
a metal grate for their companionway
which is on a catamaran you can see it's
like nearly impossible to put a huge
grate over this on a mono hollow you
have the advantage that it's usually a
smaller entrance and you can totally set
the half bars made for that and they had
really pretty ones made so it didn't
look SuperDuper ugly now they were
boarded and locked themselves inside
because they knew they were secured
inside their boat now the men were
choked and I just think destroyed a ton
of stuff on their boat but they were
safe inside I'm guessing that there
weren't a lot of guns involved in this
because I'm sure you can still shoot
through things but I mean typically they
just want to get stuff off your boat so
the dinghy was gone and the sails were
gone but you're safe inside the real
fear out here for Ben and I
is bodily harm so the most important
thing at anchor when you're cruising is
to pull up your dinghy at night the ding
is such a big target is such a high
value item incident where thousands of
dollars including the motor and the
easiest thing to do is just pull it up
so in some places like especially the
Caribbean which seems safe it's some of
the places where we saw the most caught
it was crazy there's crazy stories there
there is another island over where a
German was boarded at night and he
pulled out a gun and was shot dead the
Caribbean has been in our experience one
of the most dangerous areas with cruise
Philippines possibly on the safest so
you know we've been way more diligent in
the Philippines and in Papua New Guinea
than we were in the Caribbean we
probably should have been way more
diligent in the Caribbean and in Papua
New Guinea and the Philippines
okay windy winch some reason that's
always my top tip up dinghy I don't know
how that's turned into a blue job but it
is whoa
okay so whether you carry guns or use
some sort of other kind of self-defense
mechanism you need to think about what's
going on in terms of the lighting so
right now we're sitting in our cockpit
it's completely dark out behind us so
what does that mean for the attacker
seeing us well they're gonna have great
night vision they can see everything you
can't see them so what are you are using
a gun or a fire extinguisher or an ice
or a stun gun or anything else you're
gonna be a disadvantage because your
boat is lit up at night on the inside
and they're not something to think about
if you do here's the one we're in your
boat is to not switch on the light and
to instead grab a spotlight because the
spotlight you can shine out at them and
light them up and that kills their night
vision and then makes maybe you a harder
target but grab that spotlight and go
light them up probably the number one
rule that you need taking account is you
need to be able to lock your boat from
the inside including hatches doors
anything that anyone can get into so
every night when we go to bed we law the
cockpit companionway doors and all the
windows I have to admit we do sleep with
our window open we don't have a/c on
this boat basically an anchor this
window is the only this window right
here our bedroom window is the only
window that's open and been sort of gone
through a thing in his head where he's
trained himself that as soon as he hears
the noise he wrenches that shut and
locks it and I have actually a few
things beside my bed which we'll go look
at next
first socket no terrible every morning I
get up and make the bed and almost every
day Ben comes down at some point and
either lifts it to get in the engine or
takes a nap and unmix the bed hello
welcome to our bedroom no nothing's
gonna happen here I hope not well I hope
so I hope so van on camera anyways I
wanted to talk about just some of the
tools that we have at our bedside
because these are things that we might
use hopefully we'll never use but some
are funny some are not so funny now this
is a Fijian war club that makes me feel
safe I don't know why but um that
baseball bat would do you they basically
use these to break someone's neck or hit
them in the head to kill them it just
hangs out beside my bed I I have visions
of protecting my
castle with this I don't know why second
off we have the alarm this is the base
station to the infrared alarms that I
already showed I will put this actually
under my pillow like this if we're in a
super sketchy Anchorage and like I said
this will live up in the cockpit if
we're off the boat to kind of dissuade
anyone from coming aboard we also have
mercy
where's he did did you bring a Kiwi from
New Zealand - no that's illegal
that's my Kiwi we haven't told anyone
yet but actually exported a Kiwi from
New Zealand it's pretty bad anyways this
little guy here he just kind of hangs
out in their bedroom what put him over
here
he lives in the basket not a very good
life in there you know we we're still
trying to figure out what to feed him I
think milk back to serious business if
you do actually get boarded the idea is
to close up the boat because your safest
in the boat and then to summon help how
are you miss summon help this stuff is
gonna happen quite quick quick so we
have an air horn right here we will blow
this out our side window we also have
several flares in our little safety
basket here which we could also fire out
our little side window which is tiny no
one can get in - then finally we have
some I don't know this is like dog
attack deterrent what actually happened
in New Zealand we had this big can of
bear mace and they took it away from us
cuz they said it was illegal come on
guys seriously our cruisers really gonna
be like doing illegal things with their
bear mace that's beside their bedside
finally we have one more thing which i
think is actually a really valuable
thing for all cruisers which is a fire
extinguisher is an amazing tool to use
against attackers you will blind them
you will choke them has considerable
range and considerable effectiveness in
the short term and then once they're
choked and blinded you can go in for the
kill with the war club or the empty fire
extinguisher I promise you we'll try
this tomorrow and the last thing I have
in here is the spotlight the spotlight
has probably come in the most handy the
most number times you never know if it's
a fisherman
I think 99% of time it is a fisherman
but that one time it's not a fisherman
can you see me no see see how effective
this is okay so one final thing almost
all boats have areas in their ceilings
and in their walls where there's big
empty spots our boat is no exception and
it's really easy to convert a wall for
example a very you know mundane looking
wall put a hinge on one end a little bit
of velcro on the other you can open it
up and store your iPad's wow it's bright
today so the Sun is just coming up and
this little guy right here woke me up
this morning with that alarm because
when the Sun hits it it starts to freak
out so another thing you can do is to
leave some old stuff out - maybe not
right out like where they can see it
from outside because then they'll just
bust in for no reason
but maybe leave a credit card that's old
or a small amount of cash somewhere
that's easy to find so they don't tear
your whole entire boat apart and maybe
they won't find your secret compartment
where you have the rest of it stashed
away
we don't cruise with guns but there are
a lot of people out here that do
but there's a few things you need to
know if you're gonna do that one if you
declare them in certain countries they
will confiscate your guns when you
arrive in the country and you will have
to pick them up at the same place they
were confiscated when you go to leave so
that can be a small problem if it's a
big country and you're entering at one
island say the Marquesas and you're
leaving at another island say for Bora
they're very very very far apart so if
your guns are in way the heck back there
you just might just leave them there
maybe you don't want those guns anymore
the other thing that might happen is in
some countries they could just seal them
in a safe so you got to make sure you
have a nice gun safe on board your boat
and then customers may come on board and
just put a seal over that safe so that
your guns are safely tucked away in
there we have heard of the odd Cruiser
who maybe just doesn't declare a gun
their guns that they have on board well
you better have a good hiding spot
because we have been searched in a
couple of countries pretty well but if
you do that and they find the guns and
you haven't declared them I think there
can be quite a bit of hell to pay and
I'm not saying that's right or wrong or
wrong you're right or whatever it's up
to you how you choose to cruise and how
you choose to enter your countries but
do keep in mind that guns if you do
declare them they may not be able to
help you at anchor anyway if they're
either locked in your safe with the seal
on it or taken away by the customs
officials when you arrive not the island
that you arrive in can you shoot me with
a fire extinguisher now please this is a
big one on the boat keep in mind this
one is expired so nothing really heavy
I think it's on with them
can you believe how crazy that was it
comes right at you and totally blind you
and it's stick man it can be good so
we're leaving this Anchorage and it's
funny because we're making a security
video in this Anchorage and Ben got a
funny feeling here and we are leaving
it's a bit lady doesn't feel comfortable
spending the night here there's not a
lot of there's no one around really and
about six guys we're just in a bank and
staring at her boat for the last two
hours we should have probably left
sooner but he just got creeped out one
guy was like shaking his his penis at me
and I don't know so we're off so do you
think it's because we're doing the
security video that you're getting
totally freaked out by that maybe
there's no one else around there's these
dudes that pulled up I'm sure they're
just do its bit why didn't you go talk
to them one dude like actually was
sitting in the cockpit I was singing
aside and now she's concentrate on our
computer and like shin look up but the
dude like got out and shook his dick in
her and like I don't know there's no one
else around it's late in the day but
we're moving Anchorage's cuz I had a
serious gut feeling I like butterflies
in my stomach I do not want my wife to
get raped I'm sorry I don't care how
beautiful it is and I'm a bit choked
because we've been working on a video
for like two days and it was like just
on it's just finished and there's like
this super cool cave system and like and
now I don't get it because he has a
feeling
but I have to respect it and we're
moving but I'm just I'm kind of a little
bit I think it sucks just so you know I
mean I think it kind of sucks like a lot
it sucks a lot
exactly